Source: https://www.fairwork.gov.au/pay-and-wages/minimum-wages
Retrieved: 2026-10-10
Extracted: visible page text (scripts and navigation removed); sha256 of the fetched HTML 244eae0ca5cfa5448107801a9ef700fa87a1623ae3d7b6e340cc71f5c81c5845

Minimum wages - Fair Work Ombudsman
Skip to main content
Close
Go to home page
Fair Work Ombudsman
Translate this website. Default language is English
Login Register
My account
Home
Enquiries
Bookmarks
Resources
Log out
Open search box
Accessibility
Copyright
Disclaimer
Privacy
Subscribe to email updates
Visit Fair Work on YouTube
Visit Fair Work on X
Visit Fair Work on Facebook
Visit Fair Work on Instagram
Visit Fair Work on LinkedIn
Close
Go to home page
Fair Work Ombudsman
Translate this website. Default language is English
Login Register
My account
Home
Enquiries
Bookmarks
Resources
Log out
Open search box
Automatic translation
Our automatic translation service can be used on most of our pages and is powered by Microsoft Translator.
Select a language to translate this page into
English
عربي
Bengali
Bosnian
Bulgarian
中文
Croatian
Czech
Danish
Estonian
Nederlands
Finnish
Français
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Hebrew
हिन्दी
Hungarian
Bahasa Indonesia
Italian
日本語
한국어
Latvian
Lithuanian
Polish
Português
Romanian
Pусский
Cрпски
Slovak
Slovene
Español
Swedish
ไทย
Türkçe
Ukranian
Việt-ngữ
Language help
For professionally translated information, select your language below.
Close
Go to home page
Fair Work Ombudsman
Translate this website. Default language is English
Login Register
My account
Home
Enquiries
Bookmarks
Resources
Log out
Open search box
Search the website
Popular searches
minimum wages
annual leave
long service leave
Translate this website. Default language is English
Login Register
My account
Home
Enquiries
Bookmarks
Resources
Log out
Minimum wages
All employees working in Australia are entitled to a minimum wage. This is the minimum amount an employee can be paid for the work that they're doing.
On this page:
Find the right minimum wage
The National Minimum Wage
Award wages less than the National Minimum Wage
Job ads
Tools and resources
Related information
Find the right minimum wage
For most employees, the minimum wage is set by the award that covers their industry or occupation.
Awards cover many different industries and occupations so it's important to get it right.
Use our Pay and Conditions Tool to calculate the minimum pay rates, penalties and allowances that apply for your award.
The minimum wage refers to the amount of pay before tax is taken out (gross pay). For information about tax, including PAYG withholding, visit the Australian Taxation Office .
Go to Pay and Conditions Tool
Our downloadable Pay guides provide a summary of the current minimum pay rates under an award, making it easy to see the different pay rates for each classification.
If you're covered by an enterprise agreement or other registered agreement A document between an employer and their employees covering employment conditions. A registered agreement must be approved by and registered with the Fair Work Commission. Examples of registered agreements include enterprise agreements (including single and multi-enterprise) and greenfields agreements.
, check the agreement for the minimum pay rates. You can find enterprise agreements on the Fair Work Commission's website .
Different types of minimum wages
Some employees have a different minimum wage depending on their employment type, age or work capacity. For more information about pay for these employees, visit:
Apprentice and trainee pay rates
Junior pay rates
Employees with disability pay rates .
There are some awards with special pay rates, or that allow employers to make other pay arrangements. Find information on specific pay arrangements including:
Piece rates and commission payments
Annualised wages
Social and community services industry pay rates .
The National Minimum Wage
The National Minimum Wage applies to employees not covered by an award or registered agreement. This is the minimum pay rate provided by the Fair Work Act 2009 and is reviewed each year.
As of 1 July 2026, the National Minimum Wage is $26.44 per hour or $1004.90 per week.
Employees covered by an award or registered agreement are entitled to the minimum pay rates, including penalty rates and allowances in their award or agreement. These pay rates may be higher than the National Minimum Wage.
Minimum wage changes
Each year, the Fair Work Commission reviews both the National Minimum Wage and minimum pay rates under awards (Annual wage review). Most changes begin on the first full pay period on or after 1 July.
For more information on the wage review process visit Fair Work Commission - Annual wage reviews .
Award wages less than the National Minimum Wage
The minimum award wages in some awards may now be less than the National Minimum Wage.
For example, some awards contain introductory pay rates for new employees in their industry. These rates usually only apply for a limited time until an employee progresses to the next level.
If an employee is covered by an award or agreement, the minimum wage set out in the award will apply instead of the National Minimum Wage.
Job ads
Job advertisements (ads) can't include pay rates that breach:
the Fair Work Act, or
a fair work instrument (such as an award or enterprise agreement).
For more information visit Job ads .
Stay up to date
We update our Pay Calculator and website when the National Minimum Wage changes each year.
If you have a My account, we send updates straight to your inbox each year. Don’t have a My account? Register today.
You can also stay up to date with minimum wage changes by subscribing to email updates .
Tip
Use the Voluntary Small Business Wage Compliance Code and supporting guide to make sure employees are being paid correctly. Our guide offers practical advice and tools including a handy checklist, case studies and best practice tips.
Source reference for page: Fair Work Act 2009 sections 282–287, 293–195, 536AA
Tools and resources
Pay and Conditions Tool
Subscribe to email updates
Minimum wages fact sheet
Starting a new job online learning course
Related information
Paying wages
Penalty rates, allowances and other payments
Awards
Fair Work Commission website
Agreements
Tags
Pay/wages (eg. penalty rates, overtime)
Pay rates
The Fair Work Ombudsman acknowledges the Traditional Custodians of Country throughout Australia and their continuing connection to land, waters, skies and communities. We pay our respects to them, their Cultures, and Elders past and present.
Did you find what you were looking for?
Yes
No
Thank you for your feedback. If you would like to tell us more about the information you’ve found today you can complete our feedback form .
Please note that comments aren't monitored for personal information or workplace complaints. If you have a question or concern about your job, entitlements or obligations, please Contact us .
Bookmark to My account
Register to save these settings for next time
Why register?
Get priority support!
Save results from our Pay, Shift, Leave and Notice and Redundancy Calculators
Bookmark your favourite pages
Ask us questions and save our replies
View tailored information relevant to you.
Register 29
Already have an account?
Log in now to save this page to your account.
Log-in 30
Need help? (opens in new window)
Top
Contact us
Fair Work Online:
www.fairwork.gov.au
Fair Work Infoline:
13 13 94
Need language help?
Contacting the Translating and Interpreting Service (TIS) on
13 14 50
Hearing & speech assistance
Call through the National Relay Service (NRS):
For TTY:
13 36 77 . Ask for the Fair Work Infoline
13 13 94
Speak & Listen:
1300 555 727 . Ask for the Fair Work Infoline
13 13 94
The Fair Work Ombudsman is committed to providing you with advice that you can rely on. The information contained in this fact sheet is general in nature. If you are unsure about how it applies to your situation you can call our Infoline on 13 13 94 or speak with a union, industry association or a workplace relations professional.
Printed from fairwork.gov.au
Content last updated:
2026-08-07
© Copyright Fair Work Ombudsman
